---
title: 'Git pull dissected'
date: 2017-09-29 00:23
categories: development
tags: git learn
featured_image: '/images/posts/git-rebase.png'
lead_text: 'Using git pull by default can lead to some unexpected results when your branch has been rebased.'
---

By default almost everyone is using _git pull_ to update their local branch.
When someone has forced pushed the result of a rebased to a repository, 
executing a simple _git pull_ will often give you merge conflicts. What is
going on and how should you get to the latest truth to continue working?

## Disclaimer
Let's clear something first. Changing commit history is kindof evil. Git
warns you and does not let you do this by default. You are required to
force push your changes to the repository. Git rebase typically changes
existing commits, i.e. the hash of a commit is changed. Another evil command
is to amend a commit to the previous commit. The golden rule is, **never
rewrite history on public branches**.

In my current assignment we always rebase, because we like to have a clean
commit history. A single straight history line without any side branches.
Every feature team has its own branch they work on and when it is time to
integrate we rebase our team branch on top of integrate branch. The commit
history of our feature branch is changed and in exactly that situation
doing a _simple_ _git pull_ will give unwanted results.

## Git pull
Assuming you have not made any commits on your local branch, but only
did not update for a while. Normally, users execute a _git pull_ to
retrieve the latest commits from a branch. This is equivalent to:

```
git fetch
git merge FETCH_HEAD.
```

This actually incorporates changes to this local branch, since the history
diverged from the remote branch.

But wait, you try to merge the current state of the local branch with the 
remote branch. When any of the X commits conflict with any of the A, B or C
commits, it will result in a merge.

```
  B---C---D local
 /
A---X---X---B'---C'---D'---X remote
```

_Note that the commits marked with a *'* are commits of which the hash has
changed._

What you actually want to accomplish is, go back to where the two branches
diverted (caused by the rebase that was forcefully pushed), and get up-to-date
with the remote branch.

So execute a _git pull --rebase_ which is is equivalent to:

```
git fetch
git rebase FETCH_HEAD.
```

Now remote and local are the same again.
```
A---X---X---B'---C'---D'---X remote/local
```

## What to do
How would you know that the result of a rebase was forcefully pushed to the 
remote branch? Of course, the integrator of your team should tell every member
the feature branch got rebased on top of the integrate branch, but sometimes
that just does not happen or the message does not reach you.

The command _git status_ gives you a clue that our local branch has 8 changes,
which are not on the remote branch.

```console
$ git status
On branch master
Your branch and 'origin/master' have diverged,
and have 8 and 17 different commits each, respectively.
  (use "git pull" to merge the remote branch into yours)
nothing to commit, working directory clean

$
```

Or use _--ff-only_ which makes sure git does not merge, but aborts the 
operations so you can figure out what is going on and choose whether you 
want to merge or rebase to get up-to-date.

```console
$ git pull --ff-only
fatal: Not possible to fast-forward, aborting.

$
```

## Rebase
Normally you use _git pull --rebase_ when your local branch has commit 
which are not yet pushed to the remote branch. Your local commits are 
replayed upon the remote branch.

```
  B---C---D---Y---Y---Y local
 /
A---X---X---B'---C'---D'---X remote
```

A _git pull --rebase_ will result in the following.

```
                             Y---Y---Y local
                            /
A---X---X---B'---C'---D'---X remote
```

## Wrap up
Merges **always** result in a new commit, so merging by default seems
a unfortunate choice to me. I prefer to rebase my own commits to keep
my history clean. Also rebasing feature branches on to of the integrate
branch seems as a good approach to keep your history clean, but all team
members should be aware when a rebase has been done.

**Please note:** we only use the rebase command to put a series of commits
at the end of our upstream branch. Rebase allows much more _evil_ tricks.
```
# Commands:
#  p, pick = use commit
#  r, reword = use commit, but edit the commit message
#  e, edit = use commit, but stop for amending
#  s, squash = use commit, but meld into previous commit
#  f, fixup = like "squash", but discard this commit's log message
#  x, exec = run command (the rest of the line) using shell
#
# These lines can be re-ordered; they are executed from top to bottom.
```

Maybe it is time to update the golden rule of rebasing...  
> _Thy shall **never** rebase an upstream branch._
<i class="fa fa-quote-left fa-pull-left fa-border" aria-hidden="true"></i>
<i class="fa fa-quote-right fa-border" aria-hidden="true"></i>

Using the _git pull --rebase_ by default helps the team to prevent a merge
mess. Alternativly use _git pull --ff-only_ so you can choose your own
follow-up action when the pull fails. You can set this up on the command
line with the following command.

```console
git config pull.ff only
```
### Abandon git pull
Some people promote to [stop using git pull](https://adamcod.es/2014/12/10/git-pull-correct-workflow.html)
altogether. In that post the ultimate alias is given. First fetch and prune
deleted references, then merge with fast-forward only and when that fails
rebase your commits preserving merges.

You can add the following alias to your _~/.gitconfig_.
```
update-from = "!f() { git fetch $1 --prune; git merge --ff-only $1/$2 || git rebase --preserve-merges $1/$2; }; f"
```

Then you can run _git update-from <<remote>> <<branch-name>>_ to do all of this in one step:
```console
$ git update-from origin master
fatal: Not possible to fast-forward, aborting.
First, rewinding head to replay your work on top of it...
```
### Background
As Linus [stated](https://marc.info/?l=linux-kernel&m=111293537202443)
multiple times, his little project initially never intended to be a
source control management system (SCM). More a "distribution and archival
mechanism" on which it happend to be possible to make a SCM on top.
Maybe git is just too versatile/low-level for novice users and more
aliasses like this _update-from_ should be created to introduce git
more easily within development teams?

Please leave a comment to show whether you agree or not. Maybe you can
provide some [other](https://stevebennett.me/2012/02/24/10-things-i-hate-about-git/)
insights about git?
